Solar exploration is unlocked after the first progression gate. At this point, the player can navigate their ship around a 3D system, although most objects are relatively flat so vertical exploration is limited. Navigation can either be done manually, or by inputting commands to a ships computer with a course preview.

In terms of actual movement, the ship travels through a gridspace system. Each gridspace is 2000x2000x2000 Unity units. Upon reaching the edge of a gridspace, the player is teleported to the opposite side and the next gridspace is loaded, effectively making a near-infinite space wtihin a 2000x2000x2000 constraint.

Similar to the player, larger celestial bodies such as planets are simulated in the background and assigned a gridspace, which they too can move between. However, planets are only rendered if they are in the same or a directly neighboring space to the player. The scale of a planet varies dynamically based on the players distance, which gives the impression of much faster moving as it grows when approaching. The parent star is stationary in the centre of gridspace 0,0,0, and is always visible but scaled and moved based on the player's position and gridspace. For binary+ systems one star is considered the parent with others orbiting it, and all other planets using an offset origin point for orbit.

The system itself is initially covered with "fog", which is cleared as it is explored. The station alone exploring will clear a small radius around itself, but the ship can add a solar research module to increase this range, as well as studying in an orbital fashion. Effectively, any area the ship explores creates an explored "ring" around the parent star, making the discovery of celestial bodies much faster. 

Additionally, the player can dispatch scouting probes, which work the same as the station without the expansion module, clearing a part of the map in a straight line. The player can decide which direction the scouting probe will be deployed in. If the probe happens to collide with a celestial body, it will be destroyed. If it reaches the edge of the system it becomes "out of range" and is effectively lost as well. Until these points it will transmit data, lifting the "fog". 

Once a celestial body is discovered it can be explored in more detail by moving the ship close to it. Probes can report the aproximate size and nothing more; allowing you to tell if it has found a planet, moon, asteroid etc by taking an educated guess. Taking your primary ship there will give much more details on composition, atmosphere, gravity, exact size, day length, orbit length and much more. This lets the player make decisions on which planets they should attempt to colonise and which would be a waste of time and resources.