The game should have a generated galaxy of stars. The player can then select a star to travel to. Once at the star the player can freely move around the solar system, but cannot freely travel between stars; only via "warp travel" where a star is selected.
Due to galactic star density, the player won't be able to visit every single star, but enough that it feels like they can. The Milky Way has 100,000,000,000 stars; even simply rendering a particle for each wouldn't be feasible. Instead, the player can zoom in to a certain level and select any individually visible star; the majority of stars will be shown more as a fog where you can't distinguish the individual points of light. There should still be tens of thousands of stars the player can choose.

In terms of travel, the galaxy is X lightyears across. Each lightyear represents X amount of in-game time for warp travel. During warp travel the player can still move around their ship as normal, but cannot make ship changes or control movement.
Crossing the entire width of the galaxy is something that should take many hours, to possibly even over a real day, to achieve, as travelling even to a neighbouring system would take a few minutes. There should be a tangible sense of scale. The player's starting position is randomized from a reasonably large pool for each save, but all other systems will be consistent as generating from the same seed. This would allow players to share information about the galactic map and possibly even start to name systems and planets.

Depending on final planet count, it's possible to utilize a central server where the first person to each system or planet can name it. This would of course require moderation.

Possibly: The galaxy can be split into a grid, with each gridspace having a different skybox. These boxes will probably be relatively consistent on all playthroughs as the overall shape of the galaxy won't change much.